In a reported exchange with a theologian,
biologist John Haldane was asked:
‘What inference might one draw about
the nature of God from a study of his works?’
Haldane replied, ‘An inordinate fondness for beetles.’
—referencing the fact insects
are the most abundant animal group
and there are more kinds of beetle
than any other insect.
Haldane’s reply might seem facetious, but
it makes a serious point:
trying to infer the nature of supposed gods by studying the universe leads to random nonsense.
Imagine an unknown artist produces a work of art.
What can we conclude about
the artist from the artwork?
Well, in order to know something about the artist,
we have to correctly interpret the artwork.
If we use our own personal interpretations,
we’lljust be learning about ourselves,not the artist.
The problem becomes clear.
To correctly interpret the artwork,
we have to know something about the artist.
We’re stuck in a loop. To know about one
thing we need information about the other.
Likewise, if we hypothesise that the universe
has some mysterious creator
then to know something about that creator,
we would have to correctly interpret its creation.
But that demands we first know
something about the creator.
Without any of this information, all we have
are the wild speculations Haldane alludes to.
For every observed fact about the universe
like the number or beetles, or the number of stars
if we presuppose the existence
of some creator that intended it to be that way
when we try to speculate on what those
intentions might’ve been
there are just too many conceivable interpretations.
For example, take the fact that countless animals
die in fear and agony every day
mostly to feed other animals.
Does that mean this hypothesised creator
is a sadist that enjoys bloodsports?
Or a detached experimenter,
observing this suffering without emotion?
Or a breeder, throwing life forms into deadly competition with each other to breed the ultimate organism?
Is this creator just some cosmic pyrotechnician that sees the universe as a giant fireworks display
and views the lifeforms that fleetingly exist
among the sparks as nothing more than bacteria?
Or could it be unaware that these animals even exist?
Could it even be unaware that the universe exists?
What if the universe was merely the unintended byproduct of a completely different creation?
Without any indication of intended purpose  to all this suffering, we’re stuck in endless conjecture.
Wild as these speculations are,
they’re at least logically coherent.
Concepts of creators that are sadistic or simply unaware of our suffering might not inspire or uplift us
but they are consistent with the ruthless gladiatorial animal world in which we find ourselves.
This is in striking contrast to the self-contradicting
divine concepts found within organised religion.
Bizarre concepts like all-merciful gods that
shun children born outside of marriage, along
along with all their offspring
down to the tenth generation
or that vow to brand the noses of folks
who dismiss its existence as a fairytale.
Mercy is defined as compassion or forgiveness towards someone we have the power to punish or harm.
Vengeful gods that condemn people for natural scepticism or for the circumstances of their birth
are by definition not all-merciful.
It’s no surprise that the logically coherent
concepts and the self-contradictory concepts
were generated by very different processes.
While the coherent ones were inferred,
the contradictory ones were merely asserted
confidently, forcefully stated as the truth
by people called ‘prophets’ who make
the most extravagant claim
— a claim of access to special knowledge,
denied to the rest of us
— knowledge imparted through
unverifiable mystical revelations.
These are the human beings
who design the world’s religions
the storytellers who generate all the unsubstantiated, contradictory detail we hear about gods
— the detailed rituals, the detailed mythical histories,
the detailed lists of bizarre, unjust laws.
Without prophets, our thoughts about gods
would be as shapeless and detached
as our thoughts about pixies or elves — and would
arouse just as little conflict and division.
Instead, throughout history, prophets have provoked hostilities with the same supremacist message
condemning those who don’t believe
their stories as a subhuman underclass
and commending followers as the chosen elite.
I want to look at a handful of prophets
— some obscure, some famous —
and explore the holes in their stories.
But first, a brief word about self-reflection.
Bogus ideologies of all kinds
—religious, political, economic, social —
can hook us in by force.
Examples range from childhood indoctrination
to forcible ideological conversion in prisons.
But sometimes we get hooked in because
of some unfulfilled need within us.
It could be a need to feel secure,
to feel superior, to achieve social change
or something more ambitious like
a need to believe in an afterlife.
Sometimes, when a bogus ideology comes along
that promises to satisfy these needs
we’re so focussed on getting our needs met
that we don’t bother to properly examine that ideology.
And just like a hungry fish that doesn’t
examine the hook before biting, we get reeled in.
Immunising ourselves against manipulation
begins with reflecting on our own needs
and finding healthy ways to meet them.
When we do that, we might even find
that some of our needs are false.
For instance, we might find we don’t actually need to
feel superior,or to believe in an afterlife.
In the first of five examples of bogus prophets
I want to show what we stand to lose
when we entrust our needs to these individuals.
Dorothy Martin led a small UFO religious group
that achieved a measure of publicity in the US
when she claimed that ‘superior beings’
from a planet called ‘Clarion’
had predicted an apocalyptic flood, before
the dawn of the 21st of December 1954.
Her particular stunt was automatic writing
—scribbling messages with a pencil and
claiming her hand had been guided by spirits.
Her first message —a letter from her dead father to her mother about planting flowers in the spring —
wasn’t well received. Her mother told her
to stop inflicting this  upsetting nonsense on her.
But soon Dorothy was claiming to
scribble messages from spiritual beings
from unknown planets called Clarion and Cerus.
One spirit, called ‘Sananda’, was later identified
as the Christian Messiah, Jesus.
Dorothy herself later claimed to be his mother, Mary.
The Sananda messages were often
phrased in archaic English
typical of the King James Bible,
using terms like ‘thee’ and ‘thou’.
No one questioned why Jesus would communicate with 20th-century Americans using 17th-century English.
Would we communicate with 20th-century
Germans using 17th-century German?
This archaic language made no sense whatsoever coming from such an immeasurably wise being.
But it made perfect sense
coming from a fraudulent prophet
who wanted her phoney messages to sound
Biblically grand, profound and authoritative.
Like the Bible, Dorothy’s messages discouraged thinking, which she claimed had ‘no advantage’.
Instead, she advocated ‘inner knowing’, which she said was achieved by believing the creator’s words.
Here, I’ll repeat one of life’s rules
which could well be enough by itself
to immunise us from prophets:
People who don’t want you to think
are never your friend.
Whatever the context —religion, politics, education
— not thinking opens us up to all kinds of abuse.
Dorothy’s public announcement of the end of the world attracted over thirty followers
with eight described as heavily committed.
In addition, some observers recruited by psychologist Leon Festinger and his colleagues
infiltrated the group to record its activities.
In a surprise development, one follower — a former beautician called Bertha Blatsky —
claimed she could channel Sananda too,with her voice.
Festinger’s observers described
a faltering first performance
reporting that ‘empty phrases,
tediously repeated, came from her mouth’.
But Bertha soon got her act together.
In the next meeting, she upgraded herself
from Sananda to ‘the Creator’.
And, speaking as ‘the Creator’
she proclaimed herself to be ‘the greatest prophet
.... who ever was or ever will be’.
Her authority was undermined
when, in her ‘Creator’ persona
she tried to demand an obligatory group meeting
but was forced to reschedule
by a member who couldn’t make it.
Imagine, the creator of the universe having
to bow to human availability.
In a later meeting, she further asserted herself.
Speaking as the Creator, she ridiculed the archaic English of Dorothy’s messages
dismissing words like ‘thee’, ‘thou’
and ‘shalt’ as a waste of time.
She belittled Dorothy’s Sananda’s character
and dismissed his supposed message
about Dorothy being Mary.
And Bertha dismantled other ideas and practices
Dorothy had established, like the value of fasting.
Bertha enjoyed her food.
Dorothy must’ve realised the problem.
She’d previously told the group that a spirit message
had confirmed Bertha’s leadership role.
If she denounced Bertha as a fake,
that would undermine her own claims.
She’d failed to appreciate
a basic principle of prophethood.
Prophets are lone wolves.
They seek to establish their own vision
and don’t play well with others of their kind
—not even when they’re claiming to represent the same gods.
The two women were locked in an awkward alliance.
But whatever their differences, while
channelling their respective mythical entities
both women urged group members
to make significant sacrifices
— including quitting jobs and neglecting sick relatives.
Members also drove for miles
to witness UFO landings and alien visitations
predicted by Dorothy that never materialised.
These futile exercises were explained as spiritual trials.
In everyday terms, waiting for something
that’ll never happen is called ‘wasting life’.
Prophets present it as a noble struggle
called ‘testing faith’.
Finally, the 21st of December arrived.
The group was told it would be taken up in a flying saucer before the flood killed the rest of humanity.
They cut all the metal from their clothes,
including zips and bra straps
which they were told would produce burns
during space flight — and waited.
After several uneventful hours
Dorothy scribbled a message saying
the Creator had cancelled the apocalypse
— supposedly because their little group
had generated a force of good
not seen since the beginning of time on Earth.
It was a laughable explanation.
One prominent, committed member,
Dr. Thomas Armstrong
had explicitly stated he wasn’t
interested in saving the world.
Two other members — Cleo and Kitty —
were heard concocting vengeful
‘fantasies of violent destruction’
and anticipating ‘having the last laugh’
as the non-believers drowned.
This was plainly not an unrivalled force of good.
Nonetheless, the group swallowed
Dorothy’s implausible message.
Aside from just one member who departed,
the rest were described as jubilant.
Their commitment strengthened.
The fact that their faith was reinforced
by a failed prophecy might seem absurd to us.
But we’re looking at it from the outside
with zero personal investment.
Dorothy’s followers invested everything.
They lost jobs, savings and property.
They neglected relatives,
ended relationships, even shredded their own clothes.
Get people to make sacrifices for a person or a cause
and they’ll instinctively try to justify those sacrifices.
The bigger the sacrifice, the greater the need to justify it.
Dorothy’s followers had to cling
to the idea they’d saved the planet.
The alternative was unthinkable.
This UFO religious group is a wake up call
for the rest of us to look at the sacrifices
we make for the groups we belong to
– not just religious groups,
but political and social groups.
Sacrifices of time, money, education,
career, relationships, integrity, freedom.
What implausible stories might we accept without
question to justify our investment in these groups?
Faced with evidence of deception in
our own groups, would we listen?
Could we admit to being deceived?
Or, like Dorothy’s followers, would we
find ways to deny reality?
To admit we’ve invested
in a bogus cause takes courage.
To give it up and walk away takes strength.
But to remain in denial could
cost us everything we have.
In her thirst for esoteric knowledge,
Dorothy Martin once joined a ‘Dianetics’ group.
Dianetics was a commercial self-improvement
pseudoscience based on a process called ‘auditing’
in which people respond to various
questions and commands.
It was popular in the US just after World War II
and formed the basis of Scientology.
Its inventor, Lafayette Ronald Hubbard, claimed
it cleared the human mind of trauma.
In this state of ‘Clear’, people were
claimed to gain remarkable powers
including total recall and mastery over all illness.
Lafayette told his literary agent Forry Ackerman that
he’d died on an operating table during the war.
Rising up in spirit form, he’d wafted
incorporeally through a great ornate gate.
On the other side, he’d found
an intellectual smorgasbord —
the answer to everything that had ever
puzzled the human mind.
Like a sponge, he absorbed this esoteric information.
Lafayette claimed he’d been
given a message for humanity
and over the next two days,
he recorded it in a manuscript called ‘Excalibur’
—but claimed that whoever read it either
went insane or committed suicide.
On the grounds that it was ‘too potent’, Lafayette planned instead to publish it in diluted form.
The result was his book Dianetics.
He proclaimed it ‘a milestone for man
comparable to his discovery of fire
and superior to his inventions
of the wheel and the arch’
and told one of his wives that he had high hopes
of smashing his name ‘so violently into history’
that it would ‘take a legendary form
even if all books were destroyed’.
But in August 1950, his confidence was dented
by an incident at the Shrine Auditorium
recorded by journalist Russell Miller
in his book ‘Bare-faced Messiah’.
Riding high on the sales of his Dianetics book,
Lafayette announced the world’s first ‘Clear’ —
a woman claimed to possess fantastic powers including ‘full and perfect recall of every moment of her life’.
With the words ‘Will you come out now please, Sonya?’
he invited physics major Sonya Bianca
on stage to huge applause.
She gave a speech in praise of Dianetics.
But the audience didn’t want speeches.
They began shouting questions
to test her perfect memory.
What did she have for breakfast on
a specific date years ago?
Could she recite passages from the Dianetics book?
At one point, when Lafayette was facing away from her
she was asked what colour tie he was wearing.
She had no answers.
She couldn’t even remember simple physics formulas.
Audience members began laughing and walking out.
Instead of opting for a conventional excuse
like stage fright
Lafayette claimed bizarrely that by using
the word ‘now’ when he’d asked her to come out
he’d frozen Sonya in ‘present time’, blocking her memory.
A power you could neutralise with a three-letter word didn’t seem quite so remarkable.
Her total recall was a total sham.
And, based on his other claim of mastery over illness
Lafayette was accused
of practicing unlicensed medicine.
Within a couple of years, Dianetics
had morphed into Scientology
with Lafayette repackaging his
pseudoscience as a religion.
He brought machines similar
to lie-detectors called e-meters
into the auditing process to check subjects’ reactions.
And asking for proof was declared
a suppressive act, a punishable crime.
Lafayette now brandished the prophet’s
weapon of choice: blasphemy laws.
When individuals or groups start to shut down
and prohibit criticism and challenge
it’s about the biggest possible warning sign
—in any context. Religion. Politics. Education.
It signals the onset of totalitarian systems.
Stick around and you can
wave goodbye to successive freedoms.
And with each freedom you give up, you can watch yourself regress into a powerless, compliant child.
Former Scientologist and author Jon Atack
has noted how members were bullied
berated, pushed around, and had
their self-control taken from them.
Fortunately, his own instinct when shouted at was
to shout back — not realising he wasn’t meant to.
This adult defiance seems to have been a key factor
in his resistance to the group’s undue influence.
In over 60 years, Scientologists have failed
to demonstrate a single case
of total recall, mastery over illness or any other ability.
But, unable to ask for proof
thousands of members have
collectively paid untold millions of dollars,
putting themselves through untold hours of auditing
in the hope of gaining the elusive state of ‘clear’.
Decades after it was written
the supposedly lethal Excalibur manuscript
was unearthed by Lafayette’s staff.
His household manager,
Gerry Armstrong
reported that he managed to read it
without going insane or dying.
Accompanying documents also revealed that there
was no operating table death episode.
Lafayette’s revelation was a hallucination
induced by nitrous oxide
inhaled during a tooth extraction.
Mormonism was conceived in the 1820s by
a young American called Joseph Smith
who claimed an angel called Moroni had told him about
a book of golden plates buried in a nearby hill
along with two special stones called
Urim and Thummim.
Joseph enlisted a wealthy farmer called Martin Harris
to participate in the bizarre process
of translating the plates
which were claimed to be
an extension of the Christian Bible.
Joseph would put the stones in a hat, and
hold the hat to his face, blocking out the light.
He claimed passages of text
would then appear before his eyes
which he would dictate for Martin to transcribe.
Joseph always kept the plates hidden.
Sometimes a blanket or curtain
would be hung between him and Martin.
Magic stones were nothing new for Joseph.
Before venturing into the prophet business,
he’d tried his hand at money-digging.
Using exactly the same stone-in-a-hat routine, he
claimed he could detect buried treasure.
In those times, buried treasure was
often thought to be enchanted.
Some believed that if forbidden treasure was unearthed, the spirits could make it sink down again out of reach.
Money-diggers could pretend to dig up treasure
then claim the treasure had been reclaimed by spirits
—and still pocket their fee.
Martin Harris’s wife Lucy didn’t
believe the gold plates story.
To appease her concerns
Martin asked Joseph if he could show her
the 116 pages they’d so far produced.
Joseph later told him that their god,
Elohim, had denied his request.
But Martin kept asking
and after his third request
Joseph said Elohim had granted permission to show
the pages to his wife and a few relatives.
Martin took the pages
and showed Lucy and several others.
Then the pages were stolen.
If the golden plates story had been true,
losing the pages would’ve been a very minor setback.
It wasn’t as if they contained top secret material.
It was a new Christian testament —
supposedly a divine message intended for everyone.
What did it matter if some thief
or thieves got a sneak preview?
The only real problem would be having
to translate the golden plates all over again
repeating work already done.
There’d certainly be no reason to panic.
But if the story was false
and Joseph had made the whole thing up
losing the pages would be a catastrophe.
And that was exactly how Joseph reacted.
According to his mother,
on hearing this news
Joseph wept and groaned and
cried out repeatedly that all was lost.
With no master template to work from
the lost pages couldn’t be reproduced.
If he tried to dictate them from memory
Martin Harris was bound to notice inconsistencies.
In addition, the thief or thieves
could produce the stolen pages
at any time after the book was published
and show the translations didn’t match.
After a period of reflection
Joseph announced that Elohim
had instructed him not to go back
and translate what he’d already translated.
He said Elohim had told him that the thieves
had altered the stolen pages
so that if Joseph tried to replace them
the thieves would use their false version
to claim he’d contradicted himself.
People would then turn against Joseph.
He claimed Elohim just wanted him
to carry on where he’d left off.
It was a story full of holes.
Problem one, there was no scenario in which
it was in the thieves’ interest to alter the stolen pages.
If they believed Joseph had made the whole thing up
then they’d be expecting his second
translation not to match their stolen copy.
Altering their copy would be the last thing
on their minds.
Alternatively, if the thieves believed Joseph
could produce another perfect copy
that meant they either believed
his magical golden plates story
— in which case, they believed
they were up against Elohim himself —
or they believed Joseph had some
other master version to refer to.
If Joseph had a master copy, altering the
stolen pages would be pointless and risky.
Pointless because Joseph could
reproduce endless copies of the 116 pages
to prove he wasn’t just
making the textup as he went along.
Risky because when the new pages
were compared with the stolen pages
the portions the thieves had altered
would come under special scrutiny
being the only parts that differed.
Any sign of tampering would only
strengthen Joseph’s position.
Altering the pages made no sense.
Problem two, an all-knowing Elohim would’ve
known all along that the pages would be stolen,
and that Joseph would ultimately
not translate them again.
The supposed authors of the golden plates werethe prophet Mormon
and his son, Moroni, who had
visited Joseph in angelic form.
So, Elohim watched silently as the equivalent
of 116 pages of English text
was laboriously engraved in gold, all for nothing.
Problem three, the omnipotent Elohim
is portrayed as strikingly impotent.
He can arrange angelic visitations
reveal the secret whereabouts of magical golden plates
make text magically appear through a stone in a hat.
But can’t locate some bits of paper, or tell Joseph
who stole them, or magically destroy them
—any of which could remove
the threat against Joseph
and restore the value of
Mormon and Moroni’s hard work.
Astounding how useless the gods suddenly become
the moment any practical help’s required.
Problem four.
Elohim seems aware of how damaging
it is to have his prophets suspected of deceit.
So why did he choose Joseph Smith as a prophet —
knowing his future deceit would become
a matter of public knowledge?
When Joseph’s Book of Mormon was eventually
published, it contained some troubling problems.
One example was a passage copied verbatim
from the King James Bible.
The trouble wasn’t just that it was an exact copy.
It was that both versions contained the same error.
The authors of the Kings James Bible
had written ‘seraphims’ instead of ‘seraphim’.
Just as cherubim is the plural of cherub,
seraphim is the plural of seraph.
If Joseph was translating from the
golden plates, how could this happen?
One Mormon apologist suggested that when the
handwritten manuscript went to the printers
the typesetter might’ve noticed that the
passage was from the Biblical book of Isaiah
and decided to work from the printed
King James version to ‘ease his task’.
But that’s not a workable solution.
On reading this suggestion
I did some research to see if Joseph’s original
handwritten manuscript was available.
It was.
And it contained the erroneous ‘seraphims’.
The Book of Mormon contained
a stack of similarly damning problems.
But there was worse to come.
In the mid-1830s
some Egyptian papyri unearthed around 1820
came into Joseph’s possession.
From them, he produced The Book of Abraham
commonly considered the most important text in
a Mormon canon called the ‘Pearl of Great Price’.
But it was later discovered that the papyri were
actually just standard Egyptian funerary texts
like the Book of the Dead and Books of Breathing.
They had nothing whatsoever to do with Abraham.
Joseph’s translation was an unequivocal fraud.
In their concern to impress
the people of their own time
bogus prophets often exhibit great short-sightedness.
It seems Joseph Smith had no inkling of
the huge strides that would soon be made
in the translation of Egyptian hieroglyphics.
How have Mormons responded to this
irrefutable deception by their prophet?
Some have minimised the deception, characterising it
as a sincere but misguided invention.
Some have downplayed the book’s significance
because it wasn’t translated from the golden plates.
Some have suggested the papyri could be legitimately
read as both an ancient funerary text
and the Book of Abraham — even though they can’t
map the Book of Abraham onto the hieroglyphics.
Some have suggested the papyri merely provided ‘an occasion for meditation, reflection, and revelation’
in which Elohim revealed
the life of Abraham to Joseph
without direct correlation
to the characters on the papyri.
Earlier I asked a question
about the implausible stories we might
find ourselves accepting without question.
In these denials and evasions
we see human minds determined to protect
themselves from a profoundly painful fact.
As with Dorothy Martin’s followers
their personal investment  has made the truth of
their prophet’s deceit literally unthinkable.
In the concluding half of this two-part series,
I’ll be looking at two more famous prophets,
and drawing together some observations on
all of these undeserving oracles.